# Chapter 11 - Fault-Tolerant Workflows

> We want our application to be fault-tolerant.

Newsletter delivery should not be disrupted by:

- transient failures; like application crashes
- Postmark API errors or network timeouts.

**Concepts:**

- [ ] idempotency
- [ ] locking
- [ ] queues
- [ ] background jobs

## Idempotency: An Introduction

**retry-safety** is defined as:

> An API endpoint is retry-safe (or **idempotent**) if the caller has no way to **observe**
> if a request has been sent to the server once or multiple times.

**retry-safety** and **idempotency** are often used interchangeably when speaking to various people in the tech world.

## Implementation Strategies

- State**ful** Idempotency: Save And Replay
  - Store a unique key per HTTP request. Perform a lookup for a matching key in the store for each request
  - This approach could cause _timing_ issues where new subscribers would miss out on receiving the newsletter, who just subscribed during the exact same time the retry was submitted.
- State**less** Idempotency: Deterministic Key Generation
  - Leverage Postmark API and generate a unique key from the subscriber ID for each call to PostMark.
  - Unfortunately Postmark API doesn't provide an idempotency mechanism.

## Schema

Since we're going to use Postgres as a data store to track our Idempotent keys, we'll be storing the following:

- user id
  - A composite primary key
  - Also recoded when each row was created for easy eviction of stale rows.
- idempotency key
  - A composite primary key
  - Also recoded when each row was created for easy eviction of stale rows.
- HTTP response
  - Could use type _bytea_ but it'd be tricky to re-hydrate bytes into an `HttpResponse` object
  - Since the target is `HTTP/1.1` we'll use the type `smallint` for the status code

```sql
CREATE TYPE header_pair AS (
    name TEXT,
    value BYTEA
);

CREATE TABLE idempotency (
    user_id uuid NOT NULL REFERENCES users(user_id),
    idempotency_key TEXT NOT NULL,
    response_status_code SMALLINT NOT NULL,
    response_headers header_pair[] NOT NULL,
    response_body BYTEA NOT NULL,
    created_at timestamptz NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY(user_id, idempotency_key)
);
```

## `MessageBody` and HTTP Streaming

- HTTP/1.1 supports `Transfer-Encoding: chunked` also known as HTTP Streaming.
- The server breaks down the payload into multiple chunks and sends them over to the caller one at a time instead of accumulating the entire body in memory first.
  - It allows the server to significantly reduce its memory usage.
  - It's also useful when working with large payloads; files, results from a large query
- With HTTP streaming you pull data, one chunk at a time, until you have fetched it all.
- When the response is not being streamed, the data is available all at once.

Understanding `BoxBody` default body type of `HttpResponse`:

- `BoxBody` abstracts away the specific payload mechanism.
- Under the hood, it's just an `enum` with a variant for each strategy.
- With a special case for body-less responses.

```rust
pub struct BoxBody(BoxBodyInner);

enum BoxBodyInner {
  None(body::None),
  Bytes(Bytes),
  Stream(Pin<Box<dyn MessageBody<Error = Box<dyn stdError>>>>),
}
```

- Using the default worked so far because we didn't care about the way the response was being sent back to the caller.
- Implementing `src/idempotency/persistence.save_rsponeses()` forces us to collect the response in memory in order to save it in the `idempotency` table in the db.
  - We technically could also stream the response body directly to the database and then stream it back from the database directly to the caller.

## Transaction Isolation Levels

Concurrency works well with **locks** and **transaction isolation levels**!

- `READ COMMITTED` is the default isolation level in Postgres.
- Since we haven't touched this setting, it's applied for all queries in our application.

Postgres describes it as:

> [...] a SELECT query (without a FOR UPDATE/SHARE clause) sees only data committed before the query began;
> it never sees either uncommitted data or changes committed during query execution by concurrent transactions.
> In effect, a SELECT query sees a snapshot of the database as of the instant the query begins to run.

- Data-altering statements, instead, will be influenced by uncommitted transactions that are trying to alter the same set of rows:

> UPDATE, DELETE, SELECT FOR UPDATE [...] will only find target rows that were committed as of the command start time.
> However, such a target row might have already been updated (or deleted or locked) by another concurrent transaction by the time it is found.
> In this case, the **would-be updater will wait for the first updating transaction to commit or roll back (if it is still in progress)**.

In our application:

- The `INSERT` statement fired by the second request must wait for outcome of the SQL transaction started by the first request.
- If the latter commits, the former will `DO NOTHING`.
- If the latter rolls back, the former will actually perform the insertion.

This strategy will **not** work with _stricter_ isolation levels.

For example:

```rust
// NOTE: Experiment testing isolation levels with test:
// newsletter::concurrent_form_submission_is_handled_gracefully
sqlx::query!("SET TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL repeatable read")
  .execute(&mut transaction)
  .await?;

let n_inserted_rows = sqlx::query!(/* */)
```

- The second concurrent request fails due to a database error: `could not serialize access due to concurrent update`.
- `repeatable read` is designed to prevent non-repeatable reads; The same `SELECT` query, if run twice in a row within the same transaction, should return the same data.
- This has consequences for statements such as `UPDATE`: if they are executed within a `repeatable read` transaction.
  - They cannot modify or lock rows changed by other transactions after the repeatable read transaction began.
- This is why the transaction initiated by the 2nd request fails to commit in our little experiment.
- The same would have happened if we had chosen `serializable`; the strictest isolation level in Postgres.

## References

- [postmark batch-emails](https://postmarkapp.com/developer/user-guide/send-email-with-api/batch-emails)
- [bug in sqlx](https://github.com/launchbadge/sqlx/issues/1031)
- [bug in the Rust compiler](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/82219)
- [HTTP Streaming](https://gist.github.com/CMCDragonkai/6bfade6431e9ffb7fe88)
