# Chapter 10 - Securing Our API

Problem:

Anyone can hit the API and broadcast whatever they want to our entire mailing list.

- base64-encoding ensures that all the characters in the output are ASCII, but it doesn't provide any kind of protection
  - decoding requires no secrets; It's not encrypted!

## Using A Cryptographic Hash

tldr; Hash all stored passwords!

> Assuming that the input space is finite (i.e. password length is capped),
> it is theoretically possible to find a perfect hash function -
> f(x) == f(y) implies x == y.

## Preimage Attack

tldr; SHA3-256 is pretty safe.

- To brute-force it, it's a `2^n` where n is the hash length in bits.
- Typically if `n > 128`, it's considered unfeasible to compute unless a vulnerability is found in SHA3

## Argon2

- Use `Argon2id` with a minimum configuration of 15 MiB of memory, an iteration count of 2, and 1 degree of parallelism.
- If `Argon2id` is not available, use `bcrypt` with a work factor of 10 or more and with a password limit of 72 bytes.
- For legacy systems using `scrypt`, use a minimum CPU/memory cost parameter of (2^16), a minimum block size of 8 (1024 bytes), and a parallelization parameter of 1.
- If `FIPS-140` compliance is required, use `PBKDF2` with a work factor of 310,000 or more and set with an internal hash function of `HMAC-SHA-256`.
- Consider using a pepper to provide additional defense in depth (though alone, it provides no additional secure characteristics).

All the options are designed to be computationally intensive.

> This back-of-the-envelope calculation should make it clear that using a randomly-generated
> password provides you, as a user, with a significant level of protection against brute-force
> attacks even if the server is using fast hashing algorithms for password storage.
> Consistent usage of a password manager is indeed one of the easiest ways to boost your security profile.

## Salting

- `Argon2` is a lot slower than `SHA-3` but this is not enough to make a dictionary attack unfeasible.
- It takes longer to hash the most common 10 million passwords

**salting** is where we add a _unique_ random string to the password before the hash

- The **salt** is stored next to the password hash, in our database.
- If an attacker gets their hands on a databse backup, they will have access to all **salts**.
- But even with access to the **salts**, they'll still have to re-compute; `dictionary_size * n_users`

- OWASP recommends an additional layer of defence - **peppering**
  - All hashes stored in the database are encrypted using a shared secret, only known to the application.
  - However, encryption brings forth another set of challenges:
    - where are we going to store the key?
    - How do we rotate it?
    - Usually a Hardware Security Module (HSM) or a secret vault is used

## PHC String Format

The PHC string format provides a standard representation for a password hash: it includes the hash itself, the salt, the algorithm and all its associated parameters.

It's a great alternative to constantly keeping the algorithm and hash up to date.

Example:

```sh
# ${algorithm}${algorithm version}${$-separated algorithm parameters}${hash}${salt}
$argon2id$v=19$m=65536,t=2,p=1$gZiV/M1gPc22ElAH/Jh1Hw$CWOrkoo7oJBQ/iyh7uJ0LO2aLEfrHwTWllSAxT0zRno
```

> `PasswordVerifier::verify_password` does one more thing - it leans on Output to compare the two hashes, instead of working with raw bytes.

## Do Not Block the Async Executor

**infamous blocking problem**

`async/await` in Rust is built around concept called **cooperative scheduling**

Example:

```rust
async fn my_fn() {
  a().await;
  b().await;
  c().await;
}
```

- `my_fn()` returns a future
- When the future is _awaited_, our async runtime (tokio) enters into the picture: it starts polling it

How is **poll** implemented for the **Future** returned by `my_fn()`?

You can think of it as a state machine:

```rust
enum MyFnFuture {
  Intialized,
  CallingA,
  CallingB,
  CallingC,
  Complete
}
```

- Every time _poll_ is called, it tries to make progress by reaching the next state.

I think async Rust is similar to async JavaScript where the functions actually pause execution and resume later.

- `tokio` manages to make progress _concurrently_ on multiple tasks - by continuously parking an resuming each of them.
- **poll** is expected to be fast - it should return in less than 10-100 microseconds.
- If it takes longer than ~100 microseconds, than that's when you say _"a task is blocking the executor/the async thread"_

- For CPU intensive workloads that take longer than 1ms you should use `tokio::task::spawn_blocking`
- Those threads are reserved for blocking operations and do not interfere with the scheduling async tasks.

## User Enumeration

_timing attack_ is a type of cyber attack that exploits the time it takes for a computer or system to process a request
or perform a task. The attacker can use this information to gather sensitive data or gain unauthorized access to a system.

For example, an attacker might send a large number of requests to a server, each with a slightly different input.
The server will take slightly longer to process the requests that are more difficult to compute.
By measuring the amount of time it takes for the server to respond to each request,
the attacker can determine which input was more difficult to compute and infer some information about the input.

Prevention:

1. Remove the timing difference between an auth failure due to an invalid password and an auth failure due to a non-existent username.

- Make the processing and timing the same for invalid and valid; remove all return early

2. Limit the number of failed auth attempts for a given IP/username.

- Valuable protection against both brute-force attacks and enumeration but requires state management.

## 📦 Used

- [base64](https://crates.io/crates/base64)
- [sha3](https://crates.io/crates/sha3)

## References

- [how many passwords average person](https://tech.co/password-managers/how-many-passwords-average-person)
- [how to fake a fingerprint and break into a phone](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tj2Ty7WkGqk)
- [Pefect Hash Function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perfect_hash_function)
- [PHC String Format](https://github.com/P-H-C/phc-string-format/blob/master/phc-sf-spec.md#specification)
- [Async: What is blocking?](https://ryhl.io/blog/async-what-is-blocking/)
- [User enumeration vulnerability](https://owasp.org/www-project-web-security-testing-guide/latest/4-Web_Application_Security_Testing/03-Identity_Management_Testing/04-Testing_for_Account_Enumeration_and_Guessable_User_Account)
- [mTLS guide](https://buoyant.io/mtls-guide)
- [Client Credentials Flow](https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/client-credentials-flow)
- [JWTS and their pitfalls](https://blog.mathpresso.com/jwts-and-their-pitfalls-ffe8c9dba927)
- [Interneting is hard](https://www.internetingishard.com/)
- [Common Rust Lifetime Misconceptions](https://github.com/pretzelhammer/rust-blog/blob/master/posts/common-rust-lifetime-misconceptions.md#common-rust-lifetime-misconceptions)
